Update how-to-publish.md (#461)
NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history: app/guide/how-to-publish.md

  parent: Guide
---

If you need any help with this guidance, ask on the Slack channel – [#dpsp-design-histories](https://nhsdigitalcorporate.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C08JN2TJH2P).

## Before you start

You need:

1. A free [GitHub](https://github.com/) account
2. Join NHS Digital on GitHub – [see how to request NHS Digital access](https://nhs.sharepoint.com/sites/X26_EngineeringCOE/SitePages/GitHub-User---how-to-request-access.aspx)
3. Contributor access to this project on GitHub – ask on the Slack channel – [#dpsp-design-histories](https://nhsdigitalcorporate.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C08JN2TJH2P)

## Choose a method

Pick the method that suits you:

- **GitHub in a browser** – no software needed, good if you're new to GitHub or on a locked-down device
- **GitHub Codespaces** – edit in a code editor in your browser, no installation needed

> - **Local setup** – best if you already use the prototype kit and are comfortable with the terminal

Reviewer: The design history website doesn't use the prototype kit (it uses Eleventy instead), so I'm not sure it's worth mentioning here. Although some of the skills needed are similar.

```suggestion
- **Local setup** – best if you are comfortable with the terminal and using Node.js.
```

Author: I feel like saying node.js, might put people off?

maybe
`best if you have some experience with GitHub and are comfortable running things from the terminal`

> - **Local setup** – best if you already use the prototype kit and are comfortable with the terminal

Reviewer: These could be jump-links to the relevant section?

Author: Yep – mean to do that.

Fixed

You also need to add your service before you can publish posts. You only need to do this once – [follow the guide on how to add a new service](/guide/how-to-add-a-new-service/).

## Frontmatter

All posts need frontmatter at the top of the file. Frontmatter is a configuration block that tells the site how to present your post – things like the title, date, and author.

Only the title and date are required. Delete anything else you do not need. Make sure the date is the day you publish so posts appear in the correct order.

```
---
title: "The title of the post"
date: 2026-03-15
description: "A short summary of the post"
tags:
  - appointments
  - accessibility
author:
  - Author name
  - Another author
screenshots:
  items:
    - text: "Screenshot description"
      src: screenshot-filename.png
      caption: "Optional caption"
opengraphImage:
  src: /path/to/image.png
  alt: "Alternative text for the image"
related:
  items:
    - text: "Related post title"
      href: https://example.com/link
---

> ```

Reviewer: Could remove the example here and link to https://design-history.prevention-services.nhs.uk/guide/a-sample-template/ instead? (Avoids us having to maintain 2 examples).

Reviewer 2: Agreed, I wonder if the whole 'frontmatter' section should live with the sample template? Seems a bit weird to talk about publishing, then suddenly go into the detail of the template

Author: Agree

## Using GitHub in a browser

### Create your post

1. Write your post in [Markdown](/guide/using-markdown/) and add the frontmatter at the top

> 2. Save your file as `index.md`

Reviewer: It's not clear here _where_ you'd be saving the file to. Are you assuming it'd be saved locally to your computer first?

I wonder if it's worth changing the order so that the other steps happen first, and then you just put add your content straight into GitHub without creating a local `index.md` file?

If you're drafting it before initially adding it to GitHub, chances are you're using Word rather than a markdown file?

3. Go to the [DPSP design history repository on GitHub](https://github.com/NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history) – this is the project folder where all the files are stored
4. Click the `app` folder and find your team's folder – note down the folder name, for example `lung-health-check`

> 5. Go back to the repository root, click `app`, then `Add file` and `Create new file`

Reviewer 2: Either introduce 'root' in step 3 or keep referring to it as 'the folder where all the files are stored' (or similar non technical description)

6. In the 'name your file' box, type the folder path for your post. Include your team name, year, month, a short title, and end with `index.md`. Use hyphens instead of spaces and forward slashes to separate each part – GitHub will create a new text box when you type a forward slash

    For example: `lung-health-check/2026/03/designing-new-service/index.md`

7. Paste your Markdown file into the 'Enter file contents here' box

> 8. Click 'Commit changes' – committing saves your changes

Reviewer: Also need to mention naming a branch here I think?

9. Give your commit a name, for example a short version of your post title, then click 'Propose changes'

### Add images (optional)

Before uploading, compress your images using [TinyPNG](https://tinypng.com/) to reduce file size.

10. Go to the [DPSP design history repository on GitHub](https://github.com/NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history)
11. Click the 'main' button and select your branch – a branch is a separate copy of the files where you can make changes without affecting the main site. If you did not change the name, it should include your GitHub username
12. Navigate to your team's folder and then your new post folder
13. Click 'Add file' then 'Upload files'
14. Drag and drop your files or click 'Choose your files'

> 15. Click 'Commit changes'

Reviewer: Could mention here that you'd then need to edit the `index.md` file to reference the image using the filename? Or link to the markdown guide for images? https://design-history.prevention-services.nhs.uk/guide/using-markdown/#images

### Create a pull request

A pull request asks someone to review your changes before they go live on the main site.

16. Go to the [DPSP design history repository on GitHub](https://github.com/NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history)
17. Click 'Pull requests' and find yours
18. Click 'Compare & pull request'

> 19. Update the title and description if needed – they should summarise your post

Reviewer 2: Would appreciate an example of the PR title, esp how it differs from commit title?

20. Click 'Create pull request'

> ### Preview your post

Reviewer 2: Once you can preview, there's usually a bunch of issues you spot. Would be great to mention how to make changes at this point. 

Also, is there a way to preview changes sooner than creating the PR?

21. Scroll down to 'This branch was successfully deployed' and click 'Show environments'. If there is an error, it is likely to be in the frontmatter or how you have named or organised your files
22. Click 'View deployment' to preview the site and check your post appears in your team's section

### Get your post merged

Merging adds your changes to the main site and publishes your post.

23. Paste the URL of your pull request into [#dpsp-design-histories](https://nhsdigitalcorporate.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C08JN2TJH2P) and ask for a review
24. Once approved, click 'Merge pull request' or 'Squash and merge'

---

## Using GitHub Codespaces

### Set up your Codespace

1. Go to the [DPSP design history repository on GitHub](https://github.com/NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history)
2. Click the green 'Code' button, then click the 'Codespaces' tab
3. Click 'Create codespace on main'
4. Wait for the editor to finish setting up – this may take a minute or two
5. A preview of the design history site will open automatically in a new browser tab

You only need to create a Codespace once. After that, reopen it from the same 'Codespaces' tab.

### Create your post

> 

Reviewer: Might need to mention creating a new branch as the first step?

1. In the file explorer, find the `app` folder and your team's subfolder, for example `app/lung-health-check/`
2. Create a new folder for your post using the year, month, and a short title, for example `app/lung-health-check/2026/03/designing-new-service/`
3. Inside that folder, create a file called `index.md`

> 4. Add the [frontmatter](#frontmatter) at the top of the file

Reviewer 2: If using the template this might be redundant

5. Write your post content below the frontmatter
6. Save the file – the preview will update automatically

### Add images (optional)

Before adding images, compress them using [TinyPNG](https://tinypng.com/) to reduce file size.

1. Drag and drop your images into the same folder as your `index.md` file

> 2. Reference them in your Markdown using a relative path, for example:

Reviewer 2: Need to say more about the 'relative path' - perhaps with examples?

```
![Alt text describing the image](image-name.png)
```

### Preview your post

The preview opens automatically when your Codespace starts. You can find it again in the 'Ports' tab at the bottom of the screen – click the link next to port 8080.

### Publish your post

1. Click the 'Source Control' icon in the left sidebar
2. Click the `...` menu, select 'Branch', then 'Create branch' – a branch is a separate copy of the files where you can make changes without affecting the main site
3. Give your branch a name, for example `your-username/your-post-title`, and press Enter

> 4. Type a short commit message, for example `Add post: your post title` – a commit saves a snapshot of your changes

Reviewer 2: Like this!

2. Open your terminal and open the project folder
3. Run `npm install` to install dependencies – the software packages the project needs to run
4. Run `npm start` to run the site locally at `http://localhost:8080`

### Create your post

1. In the `app` folder, find your team's subfolder, for example `app/lung-health-check/`
2. Create a new folder for your post using the year, month, and a short title, for example `app/lung-health-check/2026/03/designing-new-service/`
3. Inside that folder, create a file called `index.md`
4. Add the [frontmatter](#frontmatter) at the top of the file
5. Write your post content below the frontmatter
6. Save the file – your local site will update automatically

### Add images (optional)

Before adding images, compress them using [TinyPNG](https://tinypng.com/) to reduce file size.

1. Save your images into the same folder as your `index.md` file
2. Reference them in your Markdown using a relative path, for example:

```
![Alt text describing the image](image-name.png)
```

### Preview your post

Run `npm start` and visit `http://localhost:8080` at any point to preview locally.

> ### Publish your post

Reviewer: This section includes all the git terminal commands. But would it be better to suggest using a git graphical user interface like the one built in to VS Code, or a separate app like GitHub Desktop?
